feat(routing): decode pathname early, don't decode `params` (#12079)
withastro/astro: .changeset/wet-foxes-walk.md

---
'astro': major
---

> `Astro.params` aren't decoded anymore. 
> 
> ### [changed]: `Astro.params` aren't decoded anymore.
> In Astro v4.x, `Astro.params` were decoded using `decodeURIComponent`. 
> 
> Astro v5.0 doesn't decode `Astro.params` anymore, so you'll need to manually decode them yourself.
> 
> #### What should I do?
> If you were relying on `Astro.params` being decoded for you, you'll need to manually decode it using `decodeURI`.
> 
> The use of [`decodeURIComponent`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/decodeURIComponent)) is discouraged because it decodes more characters than it should, for example `/`, `?`, `#` and more.
> 
> ```diff
> ---
> export function getStaticPaths() {
>   return [
> +    { params: { id: decodeURI("%5Bpage%5D") } },
> -    { params: { id: "%5Bpage%5D" } },
>   ]
> }
> 
> const { id } = Astro.params;
> ---
> ```

Reviewer: Maybe we can re-phrase it to something like this, because I think if we say `Astro.params` isn't decoded anymore, it may return encoded strings, which isn't accurate. Or maybe I'm confused with `Astro.params`?

`````suggestion
`params` passed in `getStaticPaths` are no longer automatically decoded.

### [changed]: `Astro.params` aren't decoded anymore.
In Astro v4.x, `params` in ` were automatically decoded using `decodeURIComponent`. 

Astro v5.0 doesn't automatically decode `params` in `getStaticPaths` anymore, so you'll need to manually decode them yourself if needed

#### What should I do?
If you were relying on the automatic decode, you'll need to manually decode it using `decodeURI`.

Note that the use of [`decodeURIComponent`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/decodeURIComponent)) is discouraged for `getStaticPaths` because it decodes more characters than it should, for example `/`, `?`, `#` and more.

```diff
---
export function getStaticPaths() {
  return [
+    { params: { id: decodeURI("%5Bpage%5D") } },
-    { params: { id: "%5Bpage%5D" } },
  ]
}

const { id } = Astro.params;
---
```
`````
